Add WebSocket tutorial. (#6751)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/docs/extensions/mv3/tut_websockets/index.md

---
layout: 'layouts/doc-post.njk'

> title: 'Using WebSockets in Service Workers'

Reviewer: I feel like "extensions" should be mentioned in the title

Author: It's in the seoTitle, not sure we need it in the normal title as well.

seoTitle: 'How to use WebSockets in Chrome Extension Service Workers'
date: 2023-07-04
description: 'Step-by-step instructions on how to connect to a WebSocket in your Chrome Extension.'
---

This tutorial demonstrates how to connect to a WebSocket in your Chrome Extension's service worker. You can find a [working example on Github](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/chrome-extensions-samples/tree/main/functional-samples/tutorial.websockets).

## Background

> Starting with Chrome M116, extension service workers get full support for WebSockets. Previously, a service worker could become inactive if the WebSocket connection was active for more than 30s and no other extension events occurred at that time, which could result in connection loss and the inability to receive messages.

Reviewer: It does not look like the M notation is used for chrome versions elsewhere on the site.

Author: Remove

> Starting with Chrome M116, extension service workers get full support for WebSockets. Previously, a service worker could become inactive if the WebSocket connection was active for more than 30s and no other extension events occurred at that time, which could result in connection loss and the inability to receive messages.

Reviewer 2: Similar to Patrick's comment below, I wouldn't say that the WebSocket being active was a prerequisite to the termination. Maybe something like this would be better:

```suggestion
Starting with Chrome 116, extension service workers get improved support for WebSockets. Previously, a service worker could become inactive despite a WebSocket connection being active if no other extension events occurred for 30 seconds, which would result in the service worker being terminated and the WebSocket connection being closed.
```

Author: Thanks, used your suggestion!

> The reason for this is that Chrome terminates an extension service worker after 30s of inactivity. In Chrome versions &lt;M116 messages sent or received on a WebSocket do not extend the service worker lifetime, causing Chrome to suspend the service workers with an active WebSocket connection. For more background on the extension service worker lifecycle, read the [extension service worker guide](/docs/extensions/mv3/service_workers/service-worker-lifecycle/#idle-shutdown)).

Reviewer: you already mentioned the 30 seconds in the previous sentence.

Reviewer: "causing Chrome to suspend the service workers with an active WebSocket connection"

It doesn't _cause_ it. The order of the sentence should be flipped I think. i.e. Chrome <m116 would suspend connections because messages wouldn't reset the timer.

That being said, I think this sentence more or less just repeats the previous sentence, it can probably be combined or removed.

Author: good point, I really struggled to write that paragraph. I'm using Oliver's suggestion.

From Chrome M116 on, you can keep a service worker with a WebSocket connection active by exchanging messages within the 30s service worker activity window. These can either be initiated from your server or from your extension. In the following example, we will send a regular message from the Chrome extension to the server to ensure that the service worker stays alive.

> ## Example: WebSocket keep alive

Reviewer: I _think_ it is [`keepalive`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keepalive)

Author: sounds good, changed

> First we need to make sure that the Chrome version supports WebSockets in service workers by setting the minimum Chrome to M116 in the manifest:

Reviewer: nit: minimum_chrome_version prevents it from running in unsupported versions, rather than making sure it supports it.

Author: rephrased

{% Label %}manifest.json:{% endLabel %}

```json
{
  ...
  "minimum_chrome_version": "116",
  ...
}
```

Then we can keep the service worker active by sending a keep alive message every 20s. The keep alive is started once the service worker connects to the WebSocket. The following sample WebSocket client logs messages and calls `keepAlive()` when the `onopen` event is triggered:

> ```js

Reviewer: should there be a label here?

Author: yeah, agree it's better with

---
layout: 'layouts/doc-post.njk'
title: 'Using WebSockets in Service Workers'
seoTitle: 'How to use WebSockets in Chrome extension Service Workers'
date: 2023-07-04
description: 'Step-by-step instructions on how to connect to a WebSocket in your Chrome extension.'
---

This tutorial demonstrates how to connect to a WebSocket in your Chrome extension's service worker. You can find a [working example on Github](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/chrome-extensions-samples/tree/main/functional-samples/tutorial.websockets).

## Background {: #background }

> Starting with Chrome 116, extension service workers get improved support for [WebSockets[(https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/WebSockets_API). Previously, a service worker could become inactive despite a WebSocket connection being active if no other extension events occurred for 30 seconds. This would terminate the service worker and close the WebSocket connection. For more background on the extension service worker lifecycle, read the [extension service worker guide](/docs/extensions/mv3/service_workers/service-worker-lifecycle/#idle-shutdown)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting with Chrome 116, extension service workers get improved support for [WebSockets](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/WebSockets_API). Previously, a service worker could become inactive despite a WebSocket connection being active if no other extension events occurred for 30 seconds. This would terminate the service worker and close the WebSocket connection. For more background on the extension service worker lifecycle, read the [extension service worker guide](/docs/extensions/mv3/service_workers/service-worker-lifecycle/#idle-shutdown)).
```
Link fix

From Chrome 116 on, you can keep a service worker with a WebSocket connection active by exchanging messages within the 30s service worker activity window. These can either be initiated from your server or from your extension. In the following example, we will send a regular message from the Chrome extension to the server to ensure that the service worker stays alive.

## Example: WebSocket keepalive

First we need to make sure that our extension only runs in Chrome versions supporting WebSockets in service workers by setting the minimum Chrome to 116 in the manifest:

{% Label %}manifest.json:{% endLabel %}

```json
{
  ...
  "minimum_chrome_version": "116",
  ...
}
```

Then we can keep the service worker active by sending a keepalive message every 20s. The keepalive is started once the service worker connects to the WebSocket. The following sample WebSocket client logs messages and calls `keepAlive()` when the `onopen` event is triggered:

{% Label %}serviceworker.js{% endLabel %}

> ```js

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```js
```

Labels break without an extra space 😑

---
layout: 'layouts/doc-post.njk'
title: 'Using WebSockets in Service Workers'
seoTitle: 'How to use WebSockets in Chrome Extension Service Workers'
date: 2023-07-04
description: 'Step-by-step instructions on how to connect to a WebSocket in your Chrome Extension.'
---

> This tutorial demonstrates how to connect to a WebSocket in your Chrome Extension's service worker. You can find a [working example on Github](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/chrome-extensions-samples/tree/main/functional-samples/tutorial.websockets).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrates how to connect to a WebSocket in your Chrome extension's service worker. You can find a [working example on Github](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/chrome-extensions-samples/tree/main/functional-samples/tutorial.websockets).
```

> This tutorial demonstrates how to connect to a WebSocket in your Chrome Extension's service worker. You can find a [working example on Github](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/chrome-extensions-samples/tree/main/functional-samples/tutorial.websockets).

Reviewer 3: Would this benefit from a prereq section? 
Including extension development, familiarity with extensions service workers and  maybe include a link to MDN's WebSockets in case some developers are not familiar?

Might be overkill... you're call 👍

Author: Added a link to web sockets, but a prerequisite section is too much (imo prerequisite makes sense for a tutorial, but not for a how to - I know the file name is `tut`, but it's in reality a howto).

Reviewer 3: Agreed. It wasn't a "prerequisite" to add it :) 

Thanks for adding the link. There was an issue with the bracket. I made a suggestion

> ## Background

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Background {: #background }
```

> ## Background

Reviewer 3: When I read the two first paragraphs, I get the feeling that it could be simplified a bit more. There's a few items that seem a bit redundant. 

Do you think we could tweak it a bit to make it more concise?

Author: Removed the second paragraph and rephrased the first one - wdyt?

> Starting with Chrome 116, extension service workers get improved support for WebSockets. Previously, a service worker could become inactive despite a WebSocket connection being active if no other extension events occurred for 30 seconds, which would result in the service worker being terminated and the WebSocket connection being closed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting with Chrome 116, extension service workers get improved support for WebSockets. Previously, a service worker could become inactive despite a WebSocket connection being active if no other extension events occurred for 30 seconds. This would terminate the service worker and close the WebSocket connection.
```
Readability tweak

The reason for this is that Chrome terminates an extension service worker after 30s of inactivity. In Chrome versions &lt;116 messages sent or received on a WebSocket do not extend the service worker lifetime, causing Chrome to suspend the service workers with an active WebSocket connection. For more background on the extension service worker lifecycle, read the [extension service worker guide](/docs/extensions/mv3/service_workers/service-worker-lifecycle/#idle-shutdown)).

From Chrome 116 on, you can keep a service worker with a WebSocket connection active by exchanging messages within the 30s service worker activity window. These can either be initiated from your server or from your extension. In the following example, we will send a regular message from the Chrome extension to the server to ensure that the service worker stays alive.

## Example: WebSocket keepalive

> First we need to make sure that our extension only runs in Chrome versions supporting WebSockets in service workers by setting the minimum Chrome to 116 in the manifest:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First we need to make sure that our extension only runs in Chrome versions supporting WebSockets in service workers by setting the minimum Chrome version to 116 in the manifest:
```

{% Label %}manifest.json:{% endLabel %}

```json
{
  ...
  "minimum_chrome_version": "116",
  ...
}
```

Then we can keep the service worker active by sending a keepalive message every 20s. The keepalive is started once the service worker connects to the WebSocket. The following sample WebSocket client logs messages and calls `keepAlive()` when the `onopen` event is triggered:

> {% Label %}serviceworker.js{% endLabel %}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{% Label %}service-worker.js{% endLabel %}
```
NIT: For consistency

```js

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
NIT: Removing extra space

let webSocket = null;

function connect() {
  webSocket = new WebSocket('wss://example.com/ws');

  webSocket.onopen = (event) => {
    console.log('websocket open');
    keepAlive();
  };

  webSocket.onmessage = (event) => {
    console.log(`websocket received message: ${event.data}`);
  };

  webSocket.onclose = (event) => {

>     console.log('websocket close');

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    console.log('websocket connection closed');
```

Matches the code sample

    webSocket = null;
  };
}

function disconnect() {
  webSocket.close();
  webSocket = null;

> }

Reviewer 3: Should this match the GH sample code?

```
function disconnect() {
  if (webSocket) {
    webSocket.close();
  }
}
```

Author: good catch! fixed

```

Inside `keepAlive()` we use `setInterval(...)` to regularly send a ping to the server while there is an active WebSocket connection:

```js
function keepAlive() {
  const keepAliveIntervalId = setInterval(
    () => {
      if (webSocket) {
        webSocket.send('keepalive');
      } else {
        clearInterval(keepAliveIntervalId);
      }
    },

>     // Set interval to 20s to avoid that the service worker becomes inactive.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // Set the interval to 20 seconds to prevent the service worker from becoming inactive.
```
